one refreshing thing about being 41
years old is that more and more the
people I speak to are a little bit more
mature themselves and even if they're
not they feel some kind of pressure they
feel they feel they have to live up to
the expectation of being that little bit
more mature when they talk to me
so when I was younger if I read any
philosopher whatsoever people would
throw it in my face
like with the assumption that I have
some kind of diehard uncritical fan of
this philosopher and I agree with
everything they say so I would be
reading the philosophy of Arthur Chopin
our people be like yeah well
Schopenhauer says be better if we
weren't even born at all if we just
didn't live well you think about that
with your [ __ ] show why you read that
book man like this is this is Canada
we're talking these are these are white
english-speaking Canadians members of
the of the culture that I have dubbed
the who do you think you are don't you
know who I think I am mentality that's
the mentality who do you think you are
don't you know who I think I am this
even extended to when I was reading the
Quran the Quran being the religious text
that the Muslim faith is based on these
Lama face but like the fact that I'm
reading this book doesn't mean I agree
with it guy his I mean whatever the
philosopher is I totally hate Immanuel
Kant but you know actually read a manual
conic you can't criticize them I mean
and you know who can really know
anything about the European tradition of
philosophy without reading names like
Socrates and Plato and Aristotle I am
NOT an uncritical fan of any of these
others but I start by giving credit to
you guys in my audience and those of you
take the time to talk to me on patreon
or by email or what-have-you
mmm in the last couple years people have
really not treated me that way I can't
remember a single person writing to me
with the assumption that like I'm an
uncritical fan of Socrates let alone
play-doh not one I've never had that
backhand approach now and I think it
probably is because I'm 41 years old
that's probably obviously back when I
was a skull
Buddhism there were a lot of
misconceptions and mysteries of what do
you really represent what are you really
what is it you sympathize with within
this velocity okay but this video we're
talking about a really important example
of an issue where I utterly utterly
disagree with Socrates and I even sort
of despise him and it's an issue that I
think cuts down to the most fundamental
question of what democracy is
and what democracy should be and that
has to do with our belief in education
human equality and human inequality so
I'm just gonna discuss one text briefly
and I'm just gonna chitchat with my
girlfriend about that's to be a home
there is a text I think people don't pay
enough attention to these days called
first Alcubierre DS the name al-kabir DS
is pronounced six different ways in
modern english you may know him as LC
PID is there's something about that all
right
first I'll get be at is at one point
Socrates says to occupy at ease trying
to motivate him to be a better
politician to be a better leader in a
democracy Athens is a democracy says to
him you must be aware of who your true
competition is your true competition are
just the other Democratic leaders here
in Athens who want to be important
intellectual people your real
competition is the king of Persia this
dictator the area is now Iran Greece and
Persia have been at war on and off for
the whole lifetime of Socrates and long
thereafter long before him on there I
suppose and I'll keep the ADIZ actually
gives a quite intelligent answer on that
point and he says basically look I
understand what you're saying here but
to be perfectly honest with you I think
of the the king of Persia I think of the
Emperor Persia as a normal person just
like you and I think of a normal human
being and Socrates says back this really
tells you something about the elitism in
the whole philosophy of Socrates and the
whole philosophy of Plato Socrates says
back to them no no you mustn't say that
you mustn't think that
think of the educate
that the emperor of persia said and then
lists off all these fantastic claims
about how since the day he was born the
king of persia
has learned horse riding from the
greatest warrior in all of the persian
empire how the greatest mathematician
has taught him math how there's this
series of like you know genius-level
intellect s-- who've been recruited from
across the vast empire of millions of
people of persia to teach and tutor this
young person to be the best king
possible to be the best intellectual
possible and best leader possible and
then he turns to alchemy at ease and he
says you you were supposed to be raised
by Pericles Pericles was not his
biological father but the great
political Pericles had a kind of special
role in his education upbringing often
he was like his Godfather or godparents
not worth the Gerson deals so you you
know who was supposed to be responsible
for your education was Pericles and all
Pericles did was give you an old
second-hand slave a slave who was too
old to work in the fields a slave who's
too old to be worth any money was handed
over to be your tutor and look how you
turned out and already in this
conversation they've established that
actually I'll keep you at ease agrees
with Socrates in sympathy I'll keep you
at ease feels that he's had a poor
education that he hasn't learned what he
needs to know to move ahead now and be a
great leader in this democracy
okay so already you have to feel the
profound elitism here and it's not an
elitism based on money it's not just
based on the assumption that the rich
are superior to the poor it's not an
elitism based on ethnic difference I
mean quite the contrary
here is a Greek who's willing to regard
a Persian as in no way inferior to them
on the basis of race it's not based on
ancestry or breeding it's based on
education in a sense in the same way we
still understand education today but
this is Socrates living in a society
where there was no formal system of
education whatsoever unless you count
military training they did have a formal
system of military training and it was
from the military tradition that
Socrates and Aristotle also got the
inspiration that their whole society
could be improved
if they had standardized education for
everyone or at least standardized
education for everyone who would
appreciate it perhaps all right
now there's just one brief quote I typed
out here I want to read verbatim okay
where Socrates says to occupy a day's
joking oh no my friend I am quite wrong
and I think that you ought rather to
turn your attention to MIDI Asst the
Quail reader and others like him who
manage our politics in whom as the women
would remark you may still see the
slaves cut of hair cropping out in their
minds as well as on their Pete's and
they come with their barbarous lingo to
flatter us and not to rule us so this is
Socrates insulting medias the quail
breeder so this is medieval II a farmer
a farmer who breeds quails Socrates just
thinks it's grotesque and laughable that
it's a joking matter that a farmer that
a quail breeder would have a leading
role in Athenian politics how dairy and
he still has the same haircut as a slave
he still has the same mentality as a
slave it's obvious and intentional and
untranslatable play on words the point
is that in the past he had the same
haircut as a slave and it still shows in
his way of thinking
all right Socrates is an elitist he does
think that a quail breeder that a farmer
like this should have no place in
politics and I would just note the
politics by Aristotle so the title of
the book is just politics by Arizona
many elements of that book are using
paradox and humor and irony it's very
hard to tell when Aristotle is really
being sincere with us and when he's
being a bit provocative and joking
around or when he's kind of setting up a
sort of suggestive confusion for his
reader so then later on he can tell you
what he really thinks you know even
professors do they do that say well this
is a very complicated issue
there were many sides to the story blah
blah blah blah and then later on they
say and and here's here's the solution
here's why you should
trust my perspective on the he does a
lot of this kind of thing a lot of
baffle gab to be perfect honest but one
thing he says again and again is he just
feels there's no place for common
tradesman in politics in the democracy
it comes up in different in different
contexts Socrates himself was a common
tradesman he was a stonecutter he was a
stone merchant some people like to claim
that he was a sculptor if you even study
the text there isn't really evidence for
that he might have been involved in the
sculpting business a little bit but it
seems that for the most part he measured
and cut and sold stone that he wasn't he
wasn't an artist per se but he was in
the stone the stone cutting business the
stone retailing business I'm gonna tell
you he was a lowly tradesman right and
and Aristotle was a medic medic means
you're like a third class citizen and in
Athens he can't anyway he's completely
barred these are people who themselves
are not in any way members of the
Athenian elite now admittedly Aristotle
back in his hometown he was a little bit
of an elite figure his father was a
medical doctor who got along with the
ruling family way up north but that's
that's kind of another story in Athens
he had quite a lolis that is actually
Aristotle did okay and yet we have this
totally unblocking unrepentant elitism
that you know okay
I don't just find it despicable I don't
just find it immoral I don't used to I
actually think it's it's incorrect I
think it's wrong in a totally pragmatic
sense what do you mean MIDI it's the
quail breeder is a bad political leader
stola this day if you're a quail breeder
if you're a quail farmer who promises
the right set of policies and you're
motivated do you say hey if you elect me
I'm gonna get rid of corruption in
politics I'm gonna reform the way voting
works here's the list of what I'm gonna
do so elect me and I'm gonna get it done
damn straight great then the quail
breeder is the right man for the job
right so Melissa Melissa here my
girlfriend off-camera
you've also read through cities through
cities history of the Peloponnesian War
some of the politicians they were lowly
right they were lowly figures isn't it
Cleon who's this kind of despised
military leader who's you know come up
from the lower classes he's not he's not
as erudite and aristocratic as some
others but he's a somewhat brutal you
know military leader who is to say that
his opinion doesn't count why should he
be a a political leader - yeah a sense
that I got is that how you spoke was
more important than what your position
was prior to being in politics so Mihir
this I haven't read this work but you
know to hear Socrates saying this right
okay
they were quite harsh to people who
couldn't be eloquent and express
themselves and you know in very slight
differences of accent word were despised
so you know the difference between an
Athenian accent and a bay ocean accent
this is the British pronunciation of
Bayeux Shevin like the next suburb north
from Athens there it let alone the
difference between an athenian accent
and a spartan accent or something
completely despised for this yeah this
is true yeah what I got from Thucydides
was mostly the speeches of these
different leaders and how they impacted
the citizens who were following them or
you you believe that cuz I mean even
this one quotation that medias the quail
breeder you know he used to have the
haircut of a slave and then we still has
the mentality of asleep you you really
think a well-spoken poor person a
well-spoken
quail or trades person or what have you
or even Socrates himself you really
think like did this attitude to me it's
I mean it's not as bad as racism it's
not that it's just born into you but the
idea is if you don't have the correct
education then you can't you you can't
or you shouldn't participate in politics
yeah yeah I wish I had something to say
that would disagree with what you were
saying but I mean I I think I tend to
agree with you and as a problem in
American politics that most of the
politicians are elite and you know have
this
usually they are wealthy from wealthy
families and have been able to receive
education that people in the lower class
haven't but part of this so melissa is
from the same culture as I am she's from
Detroit I'm from Toronto worlds away
worlds away other side of the river or
whatever but look um you know I don't
believe in our culture that the elite
education is a good education I don't
think it makes you a better person now
now I meet people from other cultures
particularly people from India and
Pakistan who still do really believe
that education makes you a better person
not a hundred percent but commonly in
that culture right well if you asked me
let's look at the education Donald Trump
had right let's look at the education
Barack Obama had I don't think it helped
him at all do you know Law School is an
incredibly boring dehumanizing process I
just don't believe I don't believe law
school makes you a better political
leader like I completely am willing to
believe that there could be a highly
motivated quail breeder there could be a
quail farmer a lowly person who gets
into politics and says hey look I'm not
corrupt this is what do I want to
accomplish I mean most most of politics
is about things that don't require like
depth of scientific knowledge or
something right it requires personal
integrity commitments that you reach out
to the public and communicate your
message they believe in you you say okay
elect me and now I'm gonna get this done
I like I would there's an underlying
assumption here that I would have to
have faith in what that education really
is what it means how it transforms your
character or something and and within my
own society you know I don't
okay so that's true so Jimmy Carter the
president of States was a peanut farmer
but I don't know what education you have
what do you think do you think Jimmy
Carter so I'm going to look up your
Jimmy Carter alma mater Jimmy Carter
University now I'm gonna get a
university named after Jimmy Carter or
something right there we go where to
Jimmy Carter go to college yep
so he
did he went to Georgia Tech Georgia
Southwestern and Georgia Tech so I I do
not know oh here we go
bachelor science and then joined the
Navy where he served in the submarine
Corps all right especially given the
fact that you recorded a video recently
about if you are to be involved in vegan
politics that you want to be able you
know right after that yeah I mean who do
you want to be in power he just
criticized me in a really subtle way if
you didn't catch a guy no no it's I just
think it's actually you know something
that goes without saying in American
politics and the people who get into
power or are from wealthy families that
are able they're able to afford this
education that you say you know question
the value of does this really make you a
better leader just because you've been
able to jump through the hoops that's
what I think even the information you
learn is it really relevant yeah you
learn something going through law school
or going to business school at Donald
Trump you learn nothing you learn
nothing I just don't think it's relevant
to the soul of democracy in that way
yeah I've sorry I'm trying not to get
too off-topic but I have kind of
reflected recently on my education
growing up and that I think you really
can succeed in American education system
if you're able to jump through all the
hoops if you're able to study all the
study guides and do all the test prep
you know you can do a test prep course
and get a high score on the SAT and
learn nothing I think that's where this
is going and remain completely vacuous
and ignorant
exactly just you know you can succeed in
classes and and and get the high grade
point average that you get your own
aiming toward but you might not learn
much and certainly with political
leaders I don't know if you can say that
and so much of politics is based on
money in America how much money you can
raise who you know the connections that
you have not necessarily about the
education you receive so yeah I mean
it's just a really interesting so the
next step of this discussion it's been
mentioned very briefly in a different
YouTube video before so what is the
actual philosophy education that
Socrates has this remains fairly unknown
it's it is actually read know clearly
enough in the dialogues and and note I
am choosing here to attribute this to
Socrates not to Plato I do think this is
Socrates his own approach the next step
he takes even within this one dog
dialogue first lqp at ease and it's the
same in the gorgeous and so on and so
forth as he says well but you know what
education is really about is not the
knowledge of facts it's not just the
ability to do math it's not any
particular craft like guiding a boat or
painting a picture or you know know
there's this ultimate knowledge he
believes in which is knowledge of self
which is self-knowledge which he
presents in this very frankly religious
you know way he relates this to the
Oracle at Delphi and Greek religion and
he attributes these various kind of
mystical and transformative powers to
true knowledge of self knowing your
limits knowing your own ignorance and
that that is ultimately the point of all
his discussion about what's the true
meaning of piety what's the true meaning
of justice it's not just to force people
to admit that they don't know what
justice is it's to get them to recognize
this this idea of knowledge itself now
this also explains the completely
reckless megalomania or egomania I
should say of Socrates okay so it's
clear in first lqp at ease and I think
it's even more extreme in gorgeous which
is a different dialogue written by Plato
Socrates considers himself the greatest
political leader in Athens that he is
the true master of what democracy in
politics and leading societies all about
I think you'd find that a little bit
more implicitly a little bit more
toned-down
even in Plato's Republic and in many
other sources there's this sense that he
is really the greatest man in Athens and
this bizarre sense and in both dialogues
both first of all be at ease and
gorgeous he openly reviled and insults
Pericles as
inferior to him as a leader in this way
right now of course they're two very
different contexts but this is
completely surreal to me this is really
laughable so again this is an example of
where I really disagree with and I
really scorn Socrates in as much as we
know him I think this would be just as
ridiculous as if I claimed to be a
greater political leader than Richard
Nixon or oh sorry the British leader
during World War two a Winston Churchill
right so Winston Churchill is good
example well you have this massive
towering figure who made tremendous
decisions with tremendous long-term
implications Pericles was this leader
during a time of war and he transformed
the whole fate of the city now look
let's keep it all the way real do I
think I am ethically a better person
than Richard Nixon yes I do I actually
do I actually do you know I've studied
when I do I think I'm Attica Lee a
better person than Winston Churchill as
a matter of fact I do
and actually in both cases one very
simple factor is alcoholism actually
both of those men alcohol was a much
bigger part of their story than anyone
now wants to admit it was um yeah this
is both a symptom of what was wrong with
these guys epically and it's also part
of the problem in their judgments in me
so I could very easily say I might have
made better decisions but what we're
questioning here is not hypothetically
if you were the Emperor whether or not
you would make better decision than bro
this is Socrates who is a humble
stonemason a humble craftsman and stone
carver with really no political power
and no political authority who never
made any decisions that affected anyone
hate claiming present-tense that he is
right then there that he is really the
better or the best political leader and
half that he's the one to teach he's the
one to teach alchemy at ease how to be a
great political leader and that he's the
true master of the science and
philosophy of politics whereas someone
like Pericles to him is just a joke is
just contemptible is just awful and
someone like medius the quail breeder is
just Oh
so there is a really deep egomania he
really thinks he's superior to these
other people and I know so III the
question of what year precisely Plato
wrote each of these dialogues is unknown
to me I think it is a rubes game I think
it I think we can never really know
exactly when they're written in what
order there are some questions we can't
answer but these texts alright
the political reared me the political
career of alka be at ease is a total
disaster
it very much leads to Socrates himself
being put on trial and executed and in
his defense even in plato's version he
very briefly says well you can't blame
me for what i'll keep you at easter well
oh yes they can
Socrates you were this guy's tutor and
his benefactor you were very obviously
the puppet master pulling the strings
you were much more than just his teacher
and indeed even this one dialog first
I'll go be a tease immortalizes that
this philosophical relationship between
Socrates and a young ambitious military
and political leader he was both he was
both a military leader and a polluter
and by the way he had just come back
from the Olympic Games where he made
himself famous you know he became a kind
of rock star he became a name everyone
knew and was talking about he was
already somewhat infamous in his youth
but LGB ideas came back from the Olympic
Games ready to go into politics as
someone you know famous and in this way
he was also considered staggeringly
beautiful in a culture that was
obsessively homosexual and pet her astok
so in this context also his beauty and
his voice and his athletics and these
things set him up for a career and
Socrates was the the eminence grise he
was the grey bearded old man standing
behind that powerful figure and Alka be
at ease political career was a total
total disaster it was a disaster for him
it was a disaster for Athens it was a
disaster for Sparta because he switched
sides several times he was betrayed his
outside in the war it is really a
mystifying and we have a lot of detailed
evidence about
happened throughout his whole career
right up right up to his death we were
all left astounded at how terrible you
know this pupil of Socrates was and look
let's just briefly include Plato in the
equation so Plato's the one writing
these dialogues that are partly
historical and partly fictional and
reflect Plato's bias and Plato's
intention what what happened with
Plato's career right also I'll just a
long story short it was it was a failure
he obviously tried to court power and
influence and and get clients basically
the dictators or tyrants or kings of
various smaller states within the Greek
realm not within not within Athens and
politically his ambitions all came to
nothing and also what are considered his
mature writings the writings he wrote
when he got older and older were
laughable and terrible and awful
so really Plato's book the laws is
what's been talking here it's unreadable
terrible and Aristotle laughs at it
openly and the historical evidence is
everyone laughed at it openly it wasn't
successful it didn't create the new
paradigm to replace Socrates let alone
to replace great legislators like so
long and Drago and so on so you know so
Plato's political career in a very
different way is a failure also
obviously his approach was shall we say
less muscular than the political
approach of ivali be at ease
okay severe I think this video is long
enough so I think I want it there I
think all of us need to reflect on the
extent to which our evaluation of human
nature and democracy itself implicitly
is based on ideas of inequality linked
to education the idea that you know only
a certain type of person can evaluate
the budget for medical research and
decide if the government should spend
more or less only a certain kind of
person can sit down and think how much
money should go into solar power and gas
power make those hard decisions and the
military and the health care system so
on and so forth but we live in a period
of time when everyone knows Donald Trump
has none of those qualifications
I mean so look another another sorry
this is it's a digression but it's
actually really meaningful one Socrates
as written by Plato completely laughs at
with scorn another philosopher named
Hippias he's ridiculed in multiple
dialogues okay hippy is's philosophy the
philosophy of Hippias is that a man a
gentleman ought to cultivate himself to
be a master in many different fields I
guess ideally in all fields right so he
says he's not just a philosopher he's
also learned to wrestle and he formerly
competed in wrestling at the Olympic
Games each garment he wears he made
himself so he learned to weave and so he
didn't just make the cloth he made the
belt and he did the stitching and he
writes his own poetry he has this list I
think he can play six musical
instruments or something he's mastered
each of the arts that define the society
he knows each of the arts in each of the
sciences that's the philosophy pious in
the and this is ridiculed by Socrates we
don't know if that's the philosophy of
Socrates of the philosophy Plato or both
honestly I would guess both I would
guess it's the philosophy of Socrates as
imperfectly reported but because that is
consistent with the idea of Education
that Socrates has his idea is that
fundamentally and profoundly education
is not about any manual skill about any
particular kind of technical knowledge
it's about this groovy transcendental
idea he has about self-knowledge linked
to the Delphic or at oracle blah blah
blah he has his own kind of slightly
transcendental slightly magical view of
what the ultimate purpose of education
is he also only values his own
philosophical style of dialogue so like
oh well hippy s you think you're so
great because you've mastered all these
Arts and Sciences and crafts and you're
a wrestling champion you're physically
strong you're physically fit you're
mentally if you know those yeah but if I
have a dialogue with you about what is
the true meaning of the word justice you
can't win that debate so I mean again in
this context I kind of despise Socrates
he comes off as really shallow and
self-serving and insincere but here's my
point in this context Hippias the
philosophy is that one ought to be a
master kind of under many under many
isn't that more what we're expecting of
our political leaders in this day and
age are we expecting something like
Donald Trump or Barack Obama to really
appreciate the plight of the poor to
really appreciate how the health care
system works to really appreciate what
needs to be done to improve the railroad
system and the electricity system and
and aren't we perhaps asking for
something impossible but even so that
kind of background that kind of
compendium of society you do not get out
of a degree in business you do not get
out of a degree in law you don't get out
of any of the the educational
credentials that currently we look to
our political leaders staff